1) A distributionally robust optimization approach for stochastic elective surgery scheduling with limited intensive care unit capacity - 
Karmel S. Shehadeh, Rema Padman:


Address uncertainty in the distribution of surgery duration and postoperative LOS in ICU via DR optimization. A patient may need intensive care in the ICU for an uncertain number of consecutive days after surgery. Hedge against all possible scenarios of these random parame- ters from their worst-case distribution occurring within an am- biguity set (a family of all possible distributions of random parameters). RO approach generally only hedge against the maximum (positive) devia- tions of random parameters from their mean values.

Second-stage (recourse) problem - incorporatie variables and constraints that compute the OR idle time and including the cost of OR idle time in the objective alongwith overtime cost and cost of utilization of ICU capacity. 
Decompose  recourse formulation into two sub- problems, OR block capacity (BC) problem and ICU capacity problem. Using duality theory, we derive an equivalent LP for- mulation of BC problem  and an equivalent MILP formulation of ICU capacity problem. Accordingly, we derive an equivalent MINLP reformulation of DRESS. We linearize and propose an adapted C&CG algorithm to solve the resulting reformulation. Column-and-constraints generation algorithm with Symmetry breaking constarints (patients having a common surgery type, distribution of surgery durations and LOS, and priority).

Cost Parameters - (1) Cost1: c_o = $26 / minute , c_g = c_o / 1.5 , c_t = 100 , (2) Cost2: c_o = $100 / minute , c_g = c o / 1.5 , c_t = 100 , and (3) Cost3: c_o = $26 / minute , c_g = 0 , c_t = 100 . An overtime cost of $26 per minute is based on the work of Min and Yih (2010) and Stodd, Ortiz, Ten- zer et al. (1998) who show that an hour of OR overtime costs $1560. The ratio c_o / c_g to 1.5 as in prior surgery scheduling studies ( Jebali and Diabat (2015) ; Liu et al. (2019) ; Shehadeh et al. (2019) ). To generate patient costs c_{ib} and c_{ib'} procedure as in Min and Yih (2010).

2)Data-driven Distributionally Robust Surgery Planning in Flexible Operating Rooms Over a Wasserstein Ambiguity - 
Karmel S. Shehadeh:

In flexible ORs, the capacity of the ORs is shared among the two competing surgery classes. Thus, when planning for elective surgery in flexible ORs, one needs to account for emergency surgery. Hospitals have either flexible or dedicated ORs. However, most of the existing elective surgery scheduling approaches focus on elective surgery scheduling in dedicated ORs. Dedicating ORs to emergency cases has the apparent advantage of having OR space readily available for emergency cases, which can be handled promptly without impacting the scheduled elective surgeries. However, the drawback is the low utilization of costly OR resources when emergency cases do not materialize, or emergency arrivals are lower than expected.

Presents the empirical and fitted distributions of actual surgery durations data for each specialty. Significant variability in durations within and across surgery types. Distributional ambiguity (i.e., uncertainty of probability distribution). Such uncertainty and ambiguity are hard to predict and model in advance when elective surgery is scheduled and the OR schedule is constructed. Log Normal looks good. A model with a data sample from a biased distribution (as in the SP approach), then the resulting (biased) optimal scheduling decisions may have a disappointing out-of-sample operational performance (e.g., excessive overtime) under the true probability distribution when the schedule is implemented in practice (Mohajerin Esfahani and Kuhn, 2018). 

Construct a 1-Wasserstein distance-based ambiguity set of all probability distributions of surgery durations. Propose a DRO model for elective surgery planning in flexible ORs. The objective is to minimize the sum of patient-related penalty costs (i.e., cost of performing or delaying elective surgery) and the expectation of OR overtime and idle time cost.

Using DSA structural properties, derive an equivalent mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) reformulation of our proposed min-max DRO model that can be implemented and
efficiently solved using of-the-shelf optimization software, not requiring customized algorithmic development or parameter tuning, thereby enabling practitioners to use our MILP model. Expectation over all distributions residing in the data-driven 1-Wasserstein ambiguity set.

Gerchak et al. (1996), Lamiri et al. (2008b), Lamiri et al. (2008a) proposed SP models for the elective surgery planning problem in flexible OR shared between elective and emergency surgeries. The planning problem in Lamiri et al. (2008b) is closely related to our work, and consists ofassigning elective patients to different ORs over a planning horizon in order to minimize elective patient-related costs (i.e., cost of performing or delaying surgery to the next planning horizon)and the expected operating rooms' utilization (overtime and idle time) costs. The expectation in Lamiri et al. (2008b)'s model is taken with respect to the assumed known distribution of surgery
duration. To solve their SP, Lamiri et al. (2008b) proposed a column generation approach, which can produce near-optimal solutions in a short computation time for problems with 12 operating rooms. In contrast, Lamiri et al. (2008a) employed Monte Carlo Optimization to solve a sample average approximation of their SP. These SP models assume that the hospital manager is risk-neutral and can fully characterize the probability distribution of surgery duration.

Extend the W-DRO model to determine which OR to open and then assign surgery to open OR. Specifically, we consider a Surgery Block Allocation (SBA) problem, which, as
defined in Wang et al. (2019), aims to determine the number of surgical blocks (i.e., ORs) to open and the number of elective surgeries to schedule in each open block. The fixed cost of opening OR or block b \in [B] is c_f, which incorporates staffing and equipment costs. The objective is to minimize the total cost consisting of the fixed cost of opening ORs or surgical blocks, fixed cost related to scheduling or rejecting elective surgery, and the expected cost associated with OR overtime and idle time. 

Consider two different cost structures for the objective function: (1) Cost1: c_o = $26=min, c_g = c_o=1:5, and (2) Cost2: c_o = $26=min; c_g = 0. An overtime cost of $26 per minute is based onthe work of Min and Yih (2010), Shehadeh and Padman (2021), andStodd et al. (1998). The ratio co=cg is fixed to 1.5 as in prior surgery scheduling studies (Jebali and Diabat, 2015; Liu et al., 2019;Shehadeh et al., 2019). Follow the same procedure in the literature to generate patient costs c_{ib} and c_{ib'} (with surgery of the same type having common values of these parameters). We compute the lower and upper bound of surgery duration from the data . Lamiri et al. (2008b) and Lamiri et al. (2008a) assumed that the daily capacity needed for emergency cases to be exponentially distributed witha mean of 3 and 2 hours, respectively, and the mean of the elective case to be 2 hours.

To quantify c_{ib}, this study follows the concept proposed by Testi et al. (2007). They prioritize patients by priority scores determined by c waiting time, where c is the urgency status that is the weighted sum of the numerical values of three clinical criteria such as disease progression, pain or dysfunction and disability. Each patient is assumed to have an initial cost c, and the cost c_{ib} is nondecreasing over waiting time. After a recommended time given to each patient, the costs will increase significantly and force the patient to be scheduled first. Readers can refer to MacCormick et al. (2003) and Mullen (2003) for a survey of prioritizing elective patients.


Bargetto et al 2018 considers emergency surgery tardiness

Dynamic Surgery Assignment of Multiple Operating Rooms With Planned Surgeon Arrival Times - Zheng Zhang, Xiaolan Xie, Na Geng - considers waiting time dependent on the surgeon. Surgeons in the hospital are divided as three classes: top surgeons, senior surgeons and ordinary surgeons. In the observed hospital, the partition of surgeons in the three classes is1/4, 2/4, 1/4. The following waiting costs are considered reasonable: 2.5 for top surgeons (sum of unit OR idle and overtime cost), 1.5 for senior surgeons (equally important as OR overtime), 0.5 for ordinary surgeon (less important than OR idle).

Stochastic surgery selection and sequencing under dynamic emergency break-insMathieu Vandenberghe, Stijn De Vuyst, El-Houssaine Aghezzaf & Herwig Bruneel - In the OR scheduling literature, emergency arrivalsusually follow a Poisson distribution, which iswell suited for modelling the total amount of emergenciesper day. This is, however, insufficientlygranular for our purposes. Further, while a numberof papers modelling patient flow in the emergencydepartment have been more explicit about thearrival distribution, it is clear that this distributioncan vary significantly according to country, season,day of the week, type of hospital, and so on(McCarthy et al., 2008). Our methodology does notpresuppose any particular distribution, and in fact,we would recommend practitioners to use their ownhistorical data on emergency arrivals to create a distribution.To reflect this, we seek to estimate theadded value of our model for various types of emergencyarrival distributions, and so experiments arerun for a variety of emergency arrival models: UniformLow, UniformMid, UniformHigh: thesemodels share an underlying uniform distributionfor arrival times (spread over the day betweent¼0 and t¼8), but differ in the amount ofemergency patients likely to arrive. Within anyscenario n, the arrival amount Jn is obtained bydrawing a sample from a discrete uniform distribution.The number of arrivals in “UniformLow”follows U(0, 4); “UniformMid” follows U(3, 7);“UniformHigh” follows U(6, 10).After drawing Jn samples from the underlyingdistribution, we order the samples to obtain theincreasing order statistics of A0 ¼ ðA01, . . . , A0JÞ,as per Section 3.2. RealisticPoisson: this model is based on themost granular estimation of emergency arrivaltimes (McCarthy et al., 2008) that we were ableto find. Based on this input, we defined a non homogeneousPoisson process (depicted inFigure A5) which defined an arrival rate for eachof the hours from 8 AM until 5 PM. To formeach scenario, we sample across this range inincrements of 0.5 min and a rate 1/120th thehourly rate. The resulting Poisson events determinethe number of arrivals as well as theirarrival time, precise to 0.5 min. BimodalPoisson: using a non-homogeneousPoisson process (also depicted in Figure A5), thismodel creates a bimodal distribution for arrivaltimes, with the peaks roughly corresponding toperiods of high traffic congestion (9 AM and16 PM). As an emergency distribution with lowerentropy, this provides insight into a case whereemergency arrivals could be more clearly anticipated.Scenarios are generated according to thesame method described for “RealisticPoisson”.

Cancellations incur an additional e250 per cancelledpatient, which reflects the cost of patient dissatisfactionand resources spent on preparing the patient andOR.


McIsaac et al. (2017), in which theauthors use propensity score-matched analyses tomeasure the association between surgical delay anddeath. Their results estimate the total cost differencebetween delayed and non-delayed emergency surgeryto around e1325. This is an average across allfive emergency classifications (using a very similarsystem to ESI), but it stands to reason that for themost urgent categories (which we focus on) this willfunction as a lower bound. Adjusting for thisslightly, we set the excessive waiting time cost toe1500. While this is relatively high, our solutionmethod will try to avoid incurring it in too manyscenarios. The associated threshold for what is consideredexcessive waiting time is set to 45 min. Thisis the threshold analysed in McIsaac et al. (2017)and is consistent with the latest stipulations forappropriate waiting times.

Excessive waiting time if you pass a threshold.


J. Zhang, M. Dridi and A. El Moudni (2019)
Let c p and c w be the unit costs of performing and postponing surgery, respectively, then it is reasonable to set c p < c w . Referring to the problem configura- tions of Min and Yih (2010b) and Neyshabouri and Berg (2017) , the costs incurred by assigning patients i to surgical block b ∈ B and pseudo block b  are defined as p i c p and p i c w , respectively, thus surgery and waiting costs are proportionate to patient priority. This setting allows high-priority patients to be assigned to a surgical block b ∈ B before low-priority ones.

Data
Surgery Times - https://www.causeweb.org/tshs/surgery-timing/
Daiki Min, Yuehwern Yih 2010
Except for a few, most distributions we derive from thedata analysis are consistent with empirical studies by May et al. (2000) and Spangler et al. (2004) that conclude a lognormal distributionfits in actual surgery durations.
 